CHAPTER II.
THERE IS A SCIENCE OF GETTING RICH.
There is a science of getting rich, and it is an exact science, like algebra or arithmetic.
There are certain laws which govern the process of acquiring riches.
Once these laws are learned and obeyed by any man, he will get rich with mathematical
certainty.
The ownership of money and property comes as a result of doing things in a certain way.
Those who do things in this certain way, whether on purpose or accidentally, get rich, while
those who do not do things in this certain way, no matter how hard they work or how able
they are, remain poor.
It is a natural law that like causes always produce like effects, and therefore any man
or woman who learns to do things in this certain way will infallibly get rich.
That the above statement is true is shown by the following facts.
Getting rich is not a matter of environment, for if it were, all the people in certain
neighborhoods would become wealthy, the people of one city would be all rich, while those
of other towns would all be poor, for the inhabitants of one state would roll in wealth,
while those of an adjoining state would be in poverty.
But everywhere we see rich and poor living side by side, in the same environment, and
often engaged in the same vocations.
When two men are in the same locality and in the same business, and one gets rich while
the other remains poor, it shows that getting rich is not primarily a matter of environment.
Some environments may be more favorable than others, but when two men in the same business
are in the same neighborhood, and one gets rich while the other fails, it indicates that
getting rich is a result of doing things in a certain way.
And further, the ability to do things in this certain way is not due solely to the possession
of talent, for many people who have great talent remain poor, while others who have
very little talent get rich.
Studying the people who have got rich, we find that they are an average lot in all respects,
having no greater talents or abilities than other men.
It is evident that they do not get rich because they possess talents or abilities that other
men have not, but because they happen to do things in a certain way.
Getting rich is not the result of saving or thrift, many very penurious people are poor,
while free spenders often get rich.
Nor is getting rich due to doing things which others fail to do, for two men in the same
business often do almost exactly the same things, and one gets rich while the other
remains poor or becomes bankrupt.
From all these things, we must come to the conclusion that getting rich is the result
of doing things in a certain way.
If getting rich is the result of doing things in a certain way, and if like causes always
produce like effects, then any man or woman who can do things in that way can become rich,
and the whole matter is brought within the domain of exact science.
The question arises here whether this certain way may not be so difficult that only a few
may follow it.
This cannot be true, as we have seen, so far as natural ability is concerned.
Talented people get rich, and blockheads get rich.
Intellectually brilliant people get rich, and very stupid people get rich.
Physically strong people get rich, and weak and sickly people get rich.
Some degree of ability to think and understand is, of course, essential.
But in so far natural ability is concerned, any man or woman who has sense enough to read
and understand these words can certainly get rich.
Also, we have seen that it is not a matter of environment.
Location counts for something, one would not go to the heart of the Sahara and expect to
do successful business.
Getting rich involves the necessity of dealing with man, and of being where there are people
to deal with.
And if these people are inclined to deal in the way you want to deal, so much the better.
But that is about as far as environment goes.
If anybody else in your town can get rich, so can you.
And if anybody else in your state can get rich, so can you.
Again, it is not a matter of choosing some particular business or profession.
People get rich in every business and in every profession.
While their next-door neighbours on the same vacation remain in poverty.
It is true that you will do best in a business which you like and which is congenial to you.
And if you have certain talents which are well developed, you will do best in a business
which calls for the exercise of those talents.
Also, you will do best in a business which is suited to your locality.
An ice-cream parlour would do better in a warm climate than in Greenland, and a salmon
fishery would succeed better in the north-west than in Florida, where there are no salmon.
But aside from these general limitations, getting rich is not dependent upon your engaging
in some particular business, but upon your learning to do things in a certain way.
If you are now in business and everybody else in your locality is getting rich in the same
business while you are not getting rich, it is because you are not doing things in the
same way that the other person is doing them.
No one is prevented from getting rich by lack of capital.
True, as you get capital the increase becomes more easy and rapid, but one who has capital
is already rich, and does not need to consider how to become so.
No matter how poor you may be, if you begin to do things in a certain way, you will begin
to get rich, and you will begin to have capital.
The getting of capital is a part of the process of getting rich, and it is a part of the result
which invariably follows the doing of things in a certain way.
You may be the poorest man on the continent, and be deeply in debt.
You may have neither friends, influence, nor resources, but if you begin to do things in
this way, you must infallibly begin to get rich, for like causes must produce like effects.
If you have no capital, you can get capital.
If you are in the wrong business, you can get into the right business.
If you are in the wrong location, you can go to the right location, and you can do so
in your present business and in your present location, to do things in a certain way which
causes success.